
The intervals between the horizontal lines in the diagram, may represent
each a thousand or more generations. After a thousand generations,
species (A) is supposed to have produced two fairly well-marked
varieties, namely a1 and m1. These two varieties will generally still
be exposed to the same conditions which made their parents variable, and
the tendency to variability is in itself hereditary; consequently they
will likewise tend to vary, and commonly in nearly the same manner as
did their parents. Moreover, these two varieties, being only slightly
modified forms, will tend to inherit those advantages which made their
parent (A) more numerous than most of the other inhabitants of the same
country; they will also partake of those more general advantages which
made the genus to which the parent-species belonged, a large genus
in its own country. And all these circumstances are favourable to the
production of new varieties.

If, then, these two varieties be variable, the most divergent of
their variations will generally be preserved during the next thousand
generations. And after this interval, variety a1 is supposed in the
diagram to have produced variety a2, which will, owing to the principle
of divergence, differ more from (A) than did variety a1. Variety m1 is
supposed to have produced two varieties, namely m2 and s2, differing
from each other, and more considerably from their common parent (A). We
may continue the process by similar steps for any length of time; some
of the varieties, after each thousand generations, producing only
a single variety, but in a more and more modified condition, some
producing two or three varieties, and some failing to produce any. Thus
the varieties or modified descendants of the common parent (A), will
generally go on increasing in number and diverging in character. In the
diagram the process is represented up to the ten-thousandth generation,
and under a condensed and simplified form up to the fourteen-thousandth
generation.

But I must here remark that I do not suppose that the process ever goes
on so regularly as is represented in the diagram, though in itself made
somewhat irregular, nor that it goes on continuously; it is far more
probable that each form remains for long periods unaltered, and then
again undergoes modification. Nor do I suppose that the most divergent
varieties are invariably preserved: a medium form may often long endure,
and may or may not produce more than one modified descendant; for
natural selection will always act according to the nature of the places
which are either unoccupied or not perfectly occupied by other beings;
and this will depend on infinitely complex relations. But as a general
rule, the more diversified in structure the descendants from any one
species can be rendered, the more places they will be enabled to seize
on, and the more their modified progeny will increase. In our diagram
the line of succession is broken at regular intervals by small numbered
letters marking the successive forms which have become sufficiently
distinct to be recorded as varieties. But these breaks are imaginary,
and might have been inserted anywhere, after intervals long enough to
allow the accumulation of a considerable amount of divergent variation.

As all the modified descendants from a common and widely-diffused
species, belonging to a large genus, will tend to partake of the
same advantages which made their parent successful in life, they will
generally go on multiplying in number as well as diverging in character:
this is represented in the diagram by the several divergent branches
proceeding from (A). The modified offspring from the later and more
highly improved branches in the lines of descent, will, it is probable,
often take the place of, and so destroy, the earlier and less improved
branches: this is represented in the diagram by some of the lower
branches not reaching to the upper horizontal lines. In some cases no
doubt the process of modification will be confined to a single line of
descent, and the number of modified descendants will not be increased;
although the amount of divergent modification may have been augmented.
This case would be represented in the diagram, if all the lines
proceeding from (A) were removed, excepting that from a1 to a10. In the
same way the English racehorse and English pointer have apparently
both gone on slowly diverging in character from their original stocks,
without either having given off any fresh branches or races.

After ten thousand generations, species (A) is supposed to have produced
three forms, a10, f10, and m10, which, from having diverged in character
during the successive generations, will have come to differ largely, but
perhaps unequally, from each other and from their common parent. If we
suppose the amount of change between each horizontal line in our diagram
to be excessively small, these three forms may still be only well-marked
varieties; but we have only to suppose the steps in the process of
modification to be more numerous or greater in amount, to convert these
three forms into doubtful or at least into well-defined species:
thus the diagram illustrates the steps by which the small differences
distinguishing varieties are increased into the larger differences
distinguishing species. By continuing the same process for a greater
number of generations (as shown in the diagram in a condensed and
simplified manner), we get eight species, marked by the letters between
a14 and m14, all descended from (A). Thus, as I believe, species are
multiplied and genera are formed.

In a large genus it is probable that more than one species would vary.
In the diagram I have assumed that a second species (I) has produced, by
analogous steps, after ten thousand generations, either two well-marked
varieties (w10 and z10) or two species, according to the amount of
change supposed to be represented between the horizontal lines. After
fourteen thousand generations, six new species, marked by the letters
n14 to z14, are supposed to have been produced. In any genus, the
species which are already very different in character from each
other, will generally tend to produce the greatest number of modified
descendants; for these will have the best chance of seizing on new and
widely different places in the polity of nature: hence in the diagram I
have chosen the extreme species (A), and the nearly extreme species (I),
as those which have largely varied, and have given rise to new varieties
and species. The other nine species (marked by capital letters) of our
original genus, may for long but unequal periods continue to transmit
unaltered descendants; and this is shown in the diagram by the dotted
lines unequally prolonged upwards.

But during the process of modification, represented in the diagram,
another of our principles, namely that of extinction, will have played
an important part. As in each fully stocked country natural selection
necessarily acts by the selected form having some advantage in the
struggle for life over other forms, there will be a constant tendency in
the improved descendants of any one species to supplant and exterminate
in each stage of descent their predecessors and their original
progenitor. For it should be remembered that the competition will
generally be most severe between those forms which are most nearly
related to each other in habits, constitution and structure. Hence all
the intermediate forms between the earlier and later states, that is
between the less and more improved states of a the same species, as well
as the original parent-species itself, will generally tend to become
extinct. So it probably will be with many whole collateral lines of
descent, which will be conquered by later and improved lines. If,
however, the modified offspring of a species get into some distinct
country, or become quickly adapted to some quite new station, in which
offspring and progenitor do not come into competition, both may continue
to exist.

If, then, our diagram be assumed to represent a considerable amount of
modification, species (A) and all the earlier varieties will have become
extinct, being replaced by eight new species (a14 to m14); and species
(I) will be replaced by six (n14 to z14) new species.

But we may go further than this. The original species of our genus were
supposed to resemble each other in unequal degrees, as is so generally
the case in nature; species (A) being more nearly related to B, C, and
D than to the other species; and species (I) more to G, H, K, L, than to
the others. These two species (A and I), were also supposed to be very
common and widely diffused species, so that they must originally have
had some advantage over most of the other species of the genus. Their
modified descendants, fourteen in number at the fourteen-thousandth
generation, will probably have inherited some of the same advantages:
they have also been modified and improved in a diversified manner at
each stage of descent, so as to have become adapted to many related
places in the natural economy of their country. It seems, therefore,
extremely probable that they will have taken the places of, and thus
exterminated, not only their parents (A) and (I), but likewise some of
the original species which were most nearly related to their parents.
Hence very few of the original species will have transmitted offspring
to the fourteen-thousandth generation. We may suppose that only one (F)
of the two species (E and F) which were least closely related to the
other nine original species, has transmitted descendants to this late
stage of descent.

The new species in our diagram, descended from the original eleven
species, will now be fifteen in number. Owing to the divergent tendency
of natural selection, the extreme amount of difference in character
between species a14 and z14 will be much greater than that between the
most distinct of the original eleven species. The new species, moreover,
will be allied to each other in a widely different manner. Of the eight
descendants from (A) the three marked a14, q14, p14, will be nearly
related from having recently branched off from a10; b14 and f14, from
having diverged at an earlier period from a5, will be in some degree
distinct from the three first-named species; and lastly, o14, e14, and
m14, will be nearly related one to the other, but, from having diverged
at the first commencement of the process of modification, will be widely
different from the other five species, and may constitute a sub-genus or
a distinct genus.

The six descendants from (I) will form two sub-genera or genera. But as
the original species (I) differed largely from (A), standing nearly
at the extreme end of the original genus, the six descendants from (I)
will, owing to inheritance alone, differ considerably from the eight
descendants from (A); the two groups, moreover, are supposed to have
gone on diverging in different directions. The intermediate species,
also (and this is a very important consideration), which connected the
original species (A) and (I), have all become, except (F), extinct, and
have left no descendants. Hence the six new species descended from
(I), and the eight descendants from (A), will have to be ranked as very
distinct genera, or even as distinct sub-families.

Thus it is, as I believe, that two or more genera are produced by
descent with modification, from two or more species of the same genus.
And the two or more parent-species are supposed to be descended from
some one species of an earlier genus. In our diagram this is indicated
by the broken lines beneath the capital letters, converging in
sub-branches downwards towards a single point; this point represents
a species, the supposed progenitor of our several new sub-genera and
genera.

It is worth while to reflect for a moment on the character of the new
species F14, which is supposed not to have diverged much in character,
but to have retained the form of (F), either unaltered or altered only
in a slight degree. In this case its affinities to the other fourteen
new species will be of a curious and circuitous nature. Being descended
from a form that stood between the parent-species (A) and (I),
now supposed to be extinct and unknown, it will be in some degree
intermediate in character between the two groups descended from these
two species. But as these two groups have gone on diverging in character
from the type of their parents, the new species (F14) will not be
directly intermediate between them, but rather between types of the two
groups; and every naturalist will be able to call such cases before his
mind.

In the diagram each horizontal line has hitherto been supposed to
represent a thousand generations, but each may represent a million or
more generations; it may also represent a section of the successive
strata of the earth's crust including extinct remains. We shall, when we
come to our chapter on geology, have to refer again to this subject,
and I think we shall then see that the diagram throws light on the
affinities of extinct beings, which, though generally belonging to the
same orders, families, or genera, with those now living, yet are often,
in some degree, intermediate in character between existing groups; and
we can understand this fact, for the extinct species lived at various
remote epochs when the branching lines of descent had diverged less.

I see no reason to limit the process of modification, as now explained,
to the formation of genera alone. If, in the diagram, we suppose the
amount of change represented by each successive group of diverging
dotted lines to be great, the forms marked a14 to p14, those marked
b14 and f14, and those marked o14 to m14, will form three very distinct
genera. We shall also have two very distinct genera descended from (I),
differing widely from the descendants of (A). These two groups of genera
will thus form two distinct families, or orders, according to the amount
of divergent modification supposed to be represented in the diagram. And
the two new families, or orders, are descended from two species of the
original genus; and these are supposed to be descended from some still
more ancient and unknown form.

We have seen that in each country it is the species belonging to the
larger genera which oftenest present varieties or incipient species.
This, indeed, might have been expected; for as natural selection acts
through one form having some advantage over other forms in the struggle
for existence, it will chiefly act on those which already have some
advantage; and the largeness of any group shows that its species have
inherited from a common ancestor some advantage in common. Hence, the
struggle for the production of new and modified descendants will mainly
lie between the larger groups, which are all trying to increase in
number. One large group will slowly conquer another large group,
reduce its number, and thus lessen its chance of further variation and
improvement. Within the same large group, the later and more highly
perfected sub-groups, from branching out and seizing on many new places
in the polity of nature, will constantly tend to supplant and destroy
the earlier and less improved sub-groups. Small and broken groups and
sub-groups will finally disappear. Looking to the future, we can predict
that the groups of organic beings which are now large and triumphant,
and which are least broken up, that is, which have as yet suffered least
extinction, will, for a long period, continue to increase. But which
groups will ultimately prevail, no man can predict; for we know that
many groups, formerly most extensively developed, have now become
extinct. Looking still more remotely to the future, we may predict
that, owing to the continued and steady increase of the larger groups,
a multitude of smaller groups will become utterly extinct, and leave no
modified descendants; and consequently that, of the species living at
any one period, extremely few will transmit descendants to a remote
futurity. I shall have to return to this subject in the chapter on
classification, but I may add that as, according to this view, extremely
few of the more ancient species have transmitted descendants to the
present day, and, as all the descendants of the same species form a
class, we can understand how it is that there exist so few classes in
each main division of the animal and vegetable kingdoms. Although few of
the most ancient species have left modified descendants, yet, at remote
geological periods, the earth may have been almost as well peopled with
species of many genera, families, orders and classes, as at the present
day.
